.\" Copyright (C) 1998,1999 Adam Rogoyski
.TH HEXEDIT 1
.SH NAME
hexedit \- Full screen curses Hex editor
.SH SYNOPSIS 
.nr a \n(.j
.ad l
.nr i \n(.i
.in +\w'\fBhexedit 'u
.ti \niu
.B hexedit
.de OP
.ie \\n(.$-1 .RI "[\ \fB\\$1fP" "\\$2" "\ ]"
.el .RB "[\ " "\\$1" "\ ]"
..
.OP \-8abdfgqrv
.RI "[\ " filename "\ ]"
.br
.ad \na
.SH DESCRIPTION 
.I Hexedit
is an editor to edit binary (or any) files or disks.  The Display consists
of the current offset from 0 (the first byte), the next sixteen bytes
(aligned by bytes or 32-bit words), and it's ASCII or EBCDIC text
representation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \fI-h, --help\fR
Display help
.TP
.B \fI-8, --highbit\fR
Display 8-bit text
.TP
.B \fI-a, --alltext\fR
Display all text regardless that you know better
.TP
.B \fI-b, --buffer\fR
Buffer the entire file into memory.  Faster, and enables insert and delete.
.TP
.B \fI-d, --disk\fR
File editing is a disk.  OpenBSD and Linux only.
.TP
.B \fI-f, --force\fR
Force editing of a disk.  Need this option to enable writing to disks.
.TP
.B \fI-q, --quiet\fR
Quiet Mode; Turn off all beeping.
.TP
.B \fI-r, --readonly\fR
Do not allow modifying the file
.TP
.B \fI-v, --version\fR
Display version number

.SH Commands and keys
.TP 
.B \fI^A\fR
Insert byte
.TP
.B \fIInsert\fR
Insert byte
.TP
.B \fI^D\fR
Delete byte
.TP
.B \fIDelete\fR
Delete byte
.TP
.B \fI^E\fR
viEw as text dump
.TP
.B \fI^F\fR
Page down
.TP
.B \fI^V\fR
Page down
.TP
.B \fIPage Down\fR
Page down
.TP
.B \fI^B\fR
Page Up
.TP
.B \fI^Y\fR
Page Up
.TP
.B \fIAlt-V\fR
Page Up
.TP
.B \fIPage Up\fR
Page Up
.TP
.B \fITab\fR
Switch from hex to text representation
.TP
.B \fI^I\fR
Switch from hex to text representation
.TP
.B \fI^T\fR
goTo offset
.TP
.B \fI^G\fR
Get help
.TP
.B \fI^L\fR
Redraw screen
.TP
.B \fI^C\fR
Quit without saving
.TP
.B \fI^O\fR
Save
.TP
.B \fI^X\fR
Save and Quit
.TP
.B \fI^W\fR
Search (text/hex)
.TP
.B \fI^N\fR
find Next
.TP
.B \fI^U\fR
Undo
.TP
.B \fI^R\fR
ASCII <=> EBCDIC
.TP
.B \fI^P\fR
Switch Spacings
.TP
.B \fI^+\fR
Binary Calculator

.SH Author
Adam Rogoyski <apoc@laker.net>
.SH "See Also"
od (1)
.SH BUGS
Editing disks is only supported in Linux and OpenBSD.

Please email Adam Rogoyski <apoc@laker.net> with any bugs you might find.
This man page is intentionally brief.  Please Read the included documentation
in Texinfo format for additional information
