.TH SOLUNAR 1 LOCAL

.SH NAME

solunar -- print moon and sun data on stdout

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B solunar 
[ 
.I 
.B -c, --city  
city_name
]
[ 
.I 
.B --cities  
]
[ 
.I 
.B -h
]
[ 
.I 
.B -f, --full
]
[ 
.I 
.B -l, --latlong
latitude_longitude_string
]
[ 
.I 
.B --list-astro-events
]
[ 
.I 
.B --list-moon-events
]
[ 
.I 
.B --list-named-days
]
[ 
.I 
.B --longhelp
]
[ 
.I 
.B -q, --quiet
]
[ 
.I 
.B -u, --utc
]
[ 
.I 
.B -v, --version
]

.SH DESCRIPTION

solunar prints selected information about the sun and moon to standard
output. It is intended to be used in scripts, so the output is formatted
to be easily parsed. However, it is tolerably human-readable. 

The default action is to print a summary of sunrise/sunset and moonrise/moonset
times, but command-line switches (described below) allow other calculations
to be performed. 

Most of the calculations use the algorithms published by Jean Meeus, which
are widely used and believed to be reasonably robust. Nevertheless, the
use of this program to plan military manoeuvres are control air traffic
is not recommended.


.SH OPTIONS

solunar recognizes the following command-line options.

.TP 5

.B -c, --c city city_name
Specify a city, both for location and locale purposes. Specifying a city 
sets the latitude and longitude, timezone, and DST information. The location
can be overridden with 
.I --latlong
if desired. if
.I --utc
is specified, timezone and DST information is ignore, and solunar reads
and writes times relative to UTC.

A partial city name can be given, but it must be unambiguous. 

If no city is specified, the timezone and DST settings are taken from the
current locale. However, it will usually be necessary to specify the 
position using  
.I --latlong
in such a case, as many calculations are location-dependent.

.TP

.B --c cities
Prints a list of cities known to solunar and exits.

.TP

.B -d, --datetime date_time_string 
Specify a date on which the calculation is to be performed. Depending
on the specified operation, the program will use some or all of the
date information. For example, moon phase and solar distance will
use the time and date to the minute; 
.B --list-named-days
and similar operations print a table for the year, and so all but the
year information is ignored. See DATE FORMAT below for details on how
the date string is interpreted. If no date is given, the default action
is to use the system's current (local) time and date.

.TP

.B -f, --full
Print full information for each type of calculation. The default is to
print only the more widely-used information. For example, when displaying
sunset and sunrise times, 
.B --full
will display civil and astronomical twighlight, among other things, as well
as the conventional sunset and sunrise. See also
.B --quiet
: It 
.I is
legitimate to specify both
.B --full
and
.B --quiet
at the same time.

.TP

.B -h
Print a summary of usage. 

.TP

.B --l, --latlong lat_long_string
Specify a latitude and longitude. Unless you're in uncharted territory, it
is probably more convenient to use
.B --city
to specify the nearest city. See the section LAT-LONG FORMAT below for details
of how solunar interprets the lat-long string

.TP

.B --list-astro-events, --list-named-days, --list-moon-events
Prints a list of the relevant events for the current year, or the year
specified in the
.B --datetime
option.

.TP

.B --longhelp 
Print more detailed usage information. 

.TP

.B -q, --quiet

Prints output in a more compact format, omittied section headings, and
with no intermediate or confirmatory messages. Not recommended unless
you are sure you know how solunar is interpreting the options you are 
using. See also
.B --full
; 'quiet' is not the opposite of 'full', and it is meaningful to use both
options.

.TP

.B -u, --treats

Use UTC times for input and output. The default is to use local times.

.TP

.B -v, --version

Prints the version number and exits.

.SH DATE FORMAT

Solunar accepts dates in a variety of formats. However, because of the 
ambiguity between European and US conventions, it is not 
recommended to specify dates in the format NN/NN/NNNN. If this format is
used, it is interpreted according to 
.I UK
convention: DD/MM/YYYY. 
Both date and time can be specified,
although some calculations use only the date (it is not meaningful, for
example, to ask for the time of sunset at 2pm). If a time is given, it
must follow the date, and be in 24-hour format: HH:MM.

The following are examples of valid dates:

jan 12 2009

Jan 12

january 12 16:05

12/1        (January 12th, not December 1st)

12/1/2009   (ditto)

jan 12

Jan 12 16:05

16:05

1#2009

This last format is intended for use by scripts; it consists of the
day of the year (January 1st is '1'), followed by the year. The numbers
do not wrap around to the next year -- results will be unpredicatble if
a number larger than the number of days in the year is specified.

If no date is given, the date defaults to the current system date. However,
if no time is given, the default is 2AM on the specified day. The choice of
2AM, rather than midnight, is to prevent artefacts caused by 
daylight savings (in Europe, some days have two midnights). 

To see a summary of the supported date-time formats, use 
.B --datetime help


.SH LAT-LONG FORMAT

solunar recognizes latitude-longitude strings in two formats. In both
cases latitude must be given first. In both cases, a postive number
represents north or east, and a negative south or west. 

The compact format has the following form, using degrees and minutes:

+DDMM+DDDMM

where the '+' can be a '-' in either case. Note that there must be
exactly four digits for latitude and five for longitude.  

Alternatively you can specify latitude and longitude as fractional degrees
like this:

DD.DD,DD.DD (for example 51.1,-0.4).

Neither format is particularly user-friendly, and the use of specific
cities is recommended in most cases.

.SH ACCURACY

solunar prints results to the nearest minute, but in most cases accuracy
to the minute is not available, or even appropriate. 

Sunrise/set figures
are accurate to within a minute or two, given a specific solar zenith, and
given that the latitude and longitude are exact. The choice of zenith is
convetional rather than scientific. Traditionally the sun is assumed to
have set when the highest point of its disk makes an angle of just under
91 degrees to the perpendicular at the observer's location -- not
90 degrees as might be expected. The zeniths for civil twighlight, etc., are
equally conventional.

Moonrise/set figures are accurate to within about five minutes either way.
These figures are also dependent on location. 

Times of full moons, etc., are accurate to within about ten minutes either way. 

Times of equinoxes should be accurate to within ten minutes either way, but 
perihelion and aphelion are difficult to determine, and should not be relied
on to more than the nearest hour (although it's not obvious why one would
need to know this information with such precision).
 

.SH TIMEZONE AND DAYLIGHT SAVINGS

By default, solunar will treat 
.I all
times as local to the specified city, or to the home local if no city
is given. Daylight savings time will always be used at times when it
is in effect. Consequently there can be discontinuities in the printed
results when moving from a time when DST is in effect to one where it is 
not -- this is not an error.  

If the
.B --utc
option is given, then all times are read and written as UTC (GMT, essentially)
times. solunar cannot read times in one zone and write them in another
-- it is not a timezone converter. Moreover, it is not possible to
specify a particular timezone, but disable the use of DST corrections. 
solunar relies on the underlying Unix system to provide meaningful timezone
and DST data; solunar does not provide a way to override the system, should
it prove innacurate.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP

.B solunar -c london 
Get a summary of data for London, for the current day

.TP

.B solunar -c paris -d 'aug 2'
Get a summary for Paris, on the second of August in the current year

.TP

.B solunar --list-moon-events -d 'jan 1 2012'
Get a list of full and new moons, etc., for the year 2012. Note that the
month and day are ignored in this case, but do need to be specified 
because solunar needs a complete date to parse. Note that no location
need be specified, as these events are location-independent.



.SH BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

At present, solunar is English-only in its output, and locale-specific
in its input. The latter means that month names, for example, have to
be entered as they are spelled in the home locale, regardless of what
locale the information is required for. 

Transitions in daylight savings cause some anomalies. For example,
if an event occurs at 1.30AM on a day when, as a matter of politics, there
actually is no 1.30AM, the time reported will be ambiguous.

The list of named days (Christmas Day, Easter Sunday, etc) is rather
UK specific. 

There is no default city. There is not completely reliable way on Unix/Linux
systems to get the system's current geographical location. There
are various kludges that work on some systems, but none is very appealing.

.SH AUTHOR

solunar was written by Kevin Boone between 2005 and 2012.


